---
layout: post
title: Methods and Impact for Using Federated Learning to Collaborate on Clinical Research
subtitle: Nov 8 2022. Alexander T M Cheung, Mustafa Nasir-Moin, Young Joon Fred Kwon, Jiahui Guan, Chris Liu, Lavender Jiang, Christian Raimondo, Silky Chotai, Lola Chambless, Hasan S Ahmad, Daksh Chauhan, Jang W Yoon, Todd Hollon, Vivek Buch, Douglas Kondziolka, Dinah Chen, Lama A Al-Aswad, Yindalon Aphinyanaphongs, Eric Karl Oermann
gh-repo: nyuolab/nyufl
gh-badge: [star, fork, follow]
tags: [Federated Learning, Algorithms, Benchmarking, Humans, Intracranial Hemorrhages, Machine Learning, Neural Networks Computer]
comments: true
---

Background: The development of accurate machine learning algorithms requires sufficient quantities of diverse data. This poses a challenge in health care because of the sensitive and siloed nature of biomedical information. Decentralized algorithms through federated learning (FL) avoid data aggregation by instead distributing algorithms to the data before centrally updating one global model.

Objective: To establish a multicenter collaboration and assess the feasibility of using FL to train machine learning models for intracranial hemorrhage (ICH) detection without sharing data between sites.

Methods: Five neurosurgery departments across the United States collaborated to establish a federated network and train a convolutional neural network to detect ICH on computed tomography scans. The global FL model was benchmarked against a standard, centrally trained model using a held-out data set and was compared against locally trained models using site data.

Results: A federated network of practicing neurosurgeon scientists was successfully initiated to train a model for predicting ICH. The FL model achieved an area under the ROC curve of 0.9487 (95% CI 0.9471-0.9503) when predicting all subtypes of ICH compared with a benchmark (non-FL) area under the ROC curve of 0.9753 (95% CI 0.9742-0.9764), although performance varied by subtype. The FL model consistently achieved top three performance when validated on any site's data, suggesting improved generalizability. A qualitative survey described the experience of participants in the federated network.

Conclusion: This study demonstrates the feasibility of implementing a federated network for multi-institutional collaboration among clinicians and using FL to conduct machine learning research, thereby opening a new paradigm for neurosurgical collaboration.

{% include button.html button_name="Link to Article" button_class="outline-primary" url="https://journals.lww.com/neurosurgery/Abstract/2023/02000/Methods_and_Impact_for_Using_Federated_Learning_to.24.aspx" %}

{% include button.html button_name="Code on Github" button_class="outline-success" url="https://signup.nyumets.org" %}



## Tasks
{% include button.html button_name="Classification" button_class="outline-info" %}
{% include button.html button_name="Radiology Imaging" button_class="outline-info" %}
{% include button.html button_name="ICH Classification on CTH" button_class="outline-info" %}

## Datasets
{% include button.html button_name="RSNA Intracranial Hemorrhage Detection Challenge (2019)" button_class="outline-danger" url="https://www.rsna.org/education/ai-resources-and-training/ai-image-challenge/rsna-intracranial-hemorrhage-detection-challenge-2019" %}

## Key Results
<div class="datatable-begin"></div>

Task    | Dataset                                    | Metric Name | Metric Value
------- | ------------------------------------------ | ----------- | -----------
ICH Classification on CTH  | RSNA ICH Challenge 2019 | AUC         | 0.91
ICH Classification on CTH  | RSNA ICH Challenge 2019 | Precision   | 0.8
ICH Classification on CTH  | RSNA ICH Challenge 2019 | Recall      | 0.98

<div class="datatable-end"></div>


|Task   |Metric Name                               |
|-------|--------------------------------------|
|ICH Classification on CTH|{::nomarkdown}<ul><li>AUC 0.91</li></ul>{:/}|
|ICH Classification on CTH|{::nomarkdown}<ul><li>Precision 0.8</li></ul>{:/}|
|ICH Classification on CTH|{::nomarkdown}<ul><li>Recall 0.98</li></ul>{:/}|
